cars the muse for America's greatest
songs from the complete works of Bruce
Springsteen to Tim McGraw's ode to the
American truck that song is untrue 'king
believable make sure it doesn't really
make sense that they're just driving
around in an empty lot but it looks like
they're having fun so who gives a flying
truck but America's Auto obsession isn't
just a hobby eighty-six percent of
American workers get to work by
automobile and the remaining 14 percent
presumably commute by public
transportation walking or in the case of
that one weird guy in your office named
Nathaniel penny farthing bicycle get
down from there
stop it if you don't have a car holding
down a job can be a tremendous challenge
just watch one woman describe her daily
commute via public transportation
I normally still get the kids out on
their bus on time it's just a matter of
not whether I'll make my bus this is the
first bus and then I take two trains and
another bus normally it takes me roughly
hour and a half to two hours on an
average day if I were to drive to work
it takes me maybe 10 or 15 minutes so
how commute would be 10 minutes with a
car but without one she is literally the
length of the movie the imitation game
away from her job which is to say to
wasted hours that feel like forever but
but cars are obviously expensive which
is why many people have to take out
loans to buy them some from places like
this everyone has approved EDD buyers
auto sales regardless of your credit
even if this is my trade
even if I'm self-employed even if we
have to repossessions or foreclosure and
a bankruptcy everyone is approved okay
listen I do not mean to be judgy here
but don't approve the clown he's a clown
genetically speaking he is programmed
for murder now now that is targeting
people with bad credit who are only
eligible for what are called subprime
loans and nearly a quarter of all car
loans are now of the high risk subprime
variety in fact so many are being issued
they recently reached a ten-year high
and if the phrase a boom in subprime
loans is making your eye twitch with
flashbacks to the mortgage crisis just
wait we will get there but first let me
take you on a tour of the subprime auto
loan industry and we'll start with
so-called buy here pay here dealers who
do their own lending they've been around
for years and their ads make it all look
very simple how can we get you financed
when others can't two reasons first we
are the bank we don't have to send you
or your deal anywhere the second reason
we can get you financed is because we
don't even look at your credit score of
course in fact we don't even know what a
credit score is what is a good one
pg-13 640 on the verbal 710 on math 3
under par is that a good credit score
we've got no idea and that's why you
should trust us
basically it is a good thing that car
dealers lends money to people who can't
get financing elsewhere but in practice
these dealerships can trap people with
few options into paying vastly more than
a car is worth it's just one of the many
ways in which when you are poor
everything can be more expensive the
average interest rate and a buy here pay
here a lot is 19% with some paying up to
29% and that that interest is on top of
mock-ups and add-ons that can inflate
the price of the car so just look at
Arlene Jones she went into a Chicago
dealership trusting that they would help
her when she first got to the quick auto
lot she told the salesman she had an
upper limit on price she says he was
very reassuring in the end
Arlene borrowed eight thousand six
hundred dollars at twenty four point
nine percent interest over three years
if she had paid off the loan she would
have spent more than thirteen thousand
dollars on a car that was only worth
about three thousand holy that is
outrageous the only way to acceptable to
sell someone a three thousand dollar car
for $13,000 is if you slip a
mint-condition x-men issue one into the
glove compartment at that point you're
being generous but it's no wonder that
buy here pay here lungs had an average
default rate last year of nearly one in
three with most customers who default
doing so just seven months after taking
out the loan and just think about that
seven months is not a lot of time if you
put a seven month old baby in front of
the screen right now it would not
understand anything I'm saying it
wouldn't even know if I was making fun
of it I'll show you go ahead get a baby
right now and put it in front of the
screen here we go hey dummy you don't
know that I'm locking you you stupid
wittle folks don't know you don't know
you don't who knows about that but not
you at all see seven months is not long
enough to do anything now put the kid to
bed you're a terrible parent
but the problem is the problem is even
if you're just a few days late on a
payment the dealership can repossess
your car and when they do sometimes it
is with little regard for what's inside
when the mother went to pick up her
three children at a daycare she left her
nine-month-old in the car but when she
came out there was no baby and no car I
was doing repo car you check the car for
you take it that's really just going to
you know take my money baby
yes exactly don't take a baby is a good
general rule for everyone whether you
are repossessing a car
choosing a prom date or making a
selection in the NFL Draft
don't take a baby you don't take a baby
I don't care what they did in the
combine and and increasingly it is not
difficult for buy here pay here
dealerships to repossess your car
because many now install a special
device which goes off when your payment
is due every five seconds the device is
actually beeping at them as their way
all the way taking the kids to school
all the way to work informing them that
they need to make their payment contact
or lender however if they don't then the
device at midnight most lenders choose
midnight is their time of shut off
device will not allow that car to start
okay
stepping aside the horror of the fact
that they can shut your car off that
beeping sound is unbelievably annoying
anyone with a smoke detector knows it
only takes about 30 minutes of incessant
beeping before you've completely lost
your mind
I push the button I unscrew the top and
I smash that whole thing with the
breadmaker and it's still making that
sound
so the only reasonable option is now to
set my house on fire and once they have
repossessed your car these dealers don't
have to refund your down payment and
they might decide you still owe the
money because the car is now worth less
than they sold it to you for so you can
easily end up with no car and thousands
of dollars in debt meanwhile the dealer
can turn around and sell your car to
someone else so the truth is they can
make money either way and the same car
can get sold this way over and over
again and to prove that let me take you
on a magical journey because a few years
ago the LA Times tracked the sales of
one car
from my Kansas City buy here pay here
deal it was a 2003 Kia Optima much like
this one
it had a Blue Book value of five
thousand three hundred and fifty dollars
but in April of 2008 it was sold for
nearly eleven thousand dollars or double
its Blue Book value the original buyer
complained of mechanical problems and
refused to make payments so the car was
repossessed and sold again in August
before being repossessed again
four months later and was then resold
after just three weeks before being
repossessed again from a mother of three
who without travel transportation lost
her job at Walmart
it was then resold again in May 2009 to
an owner who complained of transmission
trouble so the dealer took it back and
resold it just four weeks later after
which it was you'll never guess
repossessed again from an owner who
later filed for bankruptcy thanks in
part to payments he owed on this
piece-of-shit demon car but wait we are
not done it was sold again that December
and was repossessed just five months
later before being resold in May and it
was then surprise surprise
repossessed again even though the owner
a mother of four claims she made every
payment and then according to the LA
Times it was sold one last time before
being repossessed just one month later
that one car changed hands eight times
in three years each time at a price
double or even triple its Blue Book
value at which point you almost feel bad
for the car which presumably needed two
sessions of therapy a week just to be
able to start it crappy engine again now
now that that is worth the LA Times
lefty but we felt so emotionally
involved we actually tracked that car
down and discovered that since then it
has been stalled again repossessed again
and then sold yet again and when we
called the last listed owner she said it
had been stolen and I really hope
whoever did that drove it straight off a
cliff although I'm guessing even then
some sleazy lobster wound up selling it
to a poor unsuspecting fish
now now after seeing that you may be
glad to hear that buy here pay here
lending has lost market share in recent
years unfortunately that is only because
it seems everyone is getting into
subprime auto lending now there is a
surprising amount of competition to give
car loans to people with poor credit so
much so people who've recently declared
bankruptcy are being actively targeted
through the mail just listen to one
bankruptcy lawyer describe what he's
seen these are all car loan
solicitations high interest Carolyn
solicitations sent to Mike bankrupt
clients people who have already filed
bankruptcy here's one that looks like a
check and it's made out to $21,000 I
guess it's gonna be a used car you know
with their signature and everything sent
to one of my clients here's one that
looks like some kind of an official
certificate they encourage you to apply
for car loan even if you suffered
bankruptcy car repossession foreclosure
or all the above that is a slightly
weird tone of voice to use there he
sounds almost excited about a bankruptcy
a car repossession and a foreclosure
he's like a doctor saying wow you have
herpes HPV and gonorrhea most people
only get one and this feeding frenzy
over subprime customers now includes big
lenders like Santander and GM financial
they are both expanded their subprime
auto financing and there are newer
players like Scopus and exeter who
specialize in subprime lending and you
might be wondering why the is
everyone in such a hurry to lend money
to people with bad credit
I mean sure in the mortgage crisis they
were doing that so that they could
bundle those high interest loans
together and sell them on Wall Street
but there is absolutely no way that that
is happening that is happening again
exactly what is happening right now and
people have actually been worried about
this for a while now is there a new
bubble that's about to burst in the auto
sector does this concern you at all
though that it could possibly become a
repeat of the home loan boom do you see
similarities between the housing crisis
and what's going on now with used car
loans is there concern now that there's
gonna be another subprime crisis except
it's not gonna be mortgages it's gonna
be car loans yes there is concern that
this could be the subprime mortgage
crisis but with cars and normally if you
add the phrase but with cars to any
historical event it sounds a lot more
fun like the assassination of Abraham
Lincoln but with cars sadly this is the
exception to that rule now before you
panic experts say there are important
differences here subprime auto loans are
a much smaller part of the overall
economy than subprime mortgages were so
even if they do go bust this wouldn't
necessarily be the Big Short all over
again so much as the director video
version with Brad Garrett instead of
Brad Pitt and instead of Ryan Gosling
and actual Gosling names Ryan and Wall
Street firms insist that they have
learned their lesson and have set things
up in such a way that tons of loans can
default and investors will still be fine
but there are trouble signs for instance
standards for some of the loans being
sold as investments can be shockingly
lacs we've seen deals come to market
with very low FICO scores and in some
cases no credit scores at all loans
which is amazing so some people joke you
know you really just need a pulse right
now to get a you know subprime auto loan
so that's a good joke solid setup hard
punchline potentially devastating effect
on the American economy top shelf comedy
there if the rule of three is what it is
and behind closed doors some in the
lending industry openly acknowledge
conditions are deteriorating in fact
when we sent hidden cameras to a debt
buyers conference in Vegas a few months
ago we stumbled on Ken chilsen the head
of the National Alliance of buy here pay
here dealers he sees trouble brewing
because he thinks in
to keep pace with the big players who've
entered the subprime industry his own
dealers have been forced to issue
longer-term loans with less money down
at higher cost to clients who are
therefore at greater risk of default and
these broader lending trends are clearly
terrible news for borrowers but to hear
him tell it it's a great opportunity for
those who buy bad debts and collect on
them these people Wow
that is both inspirational and
profoundly upsetting it's like if the
song I believe I can fly merged with the
rest of our Kelly's life listen listen
the news the news don't Google that
listen the news the news that used Park
dealers are predatory is clearly not new
but it seems these days market pressures
are forcing them to be more aggressive
and take more risks to the point where
we may be getting close to an industry
that looks like this
today too crazy Johnny Johnny but don't
take it from me take it from my cousin
crazy I got a question for the people at
home do you have bad coordinates we
don't care we don't care is your credit
so bad that giving you a high interest
loan will basically chop your dough
mountains that which there's no
reasonable hope of this game we don't
give up we've got a beautiful offer for
you right now man this here is a free
free free free free free pre-owned 2003
Jimmy Jimmy you gonna tell the people
when it comes well I will that comes
fully loaded with four tires one engine
and beeping device which emits a sound
that will haunt your dream does it come
with anything else it does matter if you
check the back seat this car is baby
there is an actual baby in this time
right now I have serious personal
reservations about the situation this
time and what don't focus on that look
this car is worth $2,000 but will let
you have it for zero down and just two
hundred a month for the next seven years
that's nearly a thousand don't do the
actual math on my don't think of it I
don't like this act now and this car
will affect every financial decision you
make for the best part of the next
decade and that is a crazy jolly profit
this piece-of-shit car is actually an
opportunity for Wall Street to but don't
listen to me listen to our accountant
crazy Walter
well it's true if you sent aside the
human misery this moment has the
potential to cause as part of an over
collateralized security this can be sold
as it as a hot time as a high-yield
investment goes up the barn it's so easy
for us to get you in this car why it is
almost quipment it truly feels like it
somehow joining us